<!-- ******************** METHODOLGY ******************** -->
<chapter id="methods"><title>Methodology</title>

<para>To send out a call to the instrument editors to assist in
writing instrument and other specialized NeXus file definitions by
following these steps:

<orderedlist numeration="loweralpha">

<listitem id="method.ol.draw"><para>Draw a schematic diagram of the
instrument (line art, not a CAD style drawing).</para></listitem>

<listitem id="method.ol.write"><para>Write a brief document outlining
the purpose of the instrument. In the summary, list existing packages
that perform data reduction and/or analysis for this type of
data. Also list the information that will (and will not) exist in the
file including, but not limited to, characterization measurements used
for subtracting a background or normalizing to an incident
spectrum.</para></listitem>

<listitem id="method.ol.ask"><para>Ask the people that maintain the
packages listed in step <xref linkend="method.ol.write"> to provide a
list of essential variables that the data file should
contain.</para></listitem>

<listitem id="method.ol.send"><para>Send the document and the diagram
to the NIAC who will nominate someone to construct a XML
definition.</para></listitem>

<listitem id="method.ol.niac"><para>The NIAC will construct the XML
definition.</para></listitem>

<listitem id="method.ol.write-file"><para>Write a sample NeXus file
conforming to the instrument definition (for example, using
NXtranslate).</para></listitem>

<listitem id="method.ol.test"><para>Test the file, repeating steps
<xref linkend="method.ol.niac"> and <xref
linkend="method.ol.write-file"> as appropriate.</para></listitem>

<listitem id="method.ol.ratify"><para>Request ratification once the
testing phase is complete.</para></listitem>

</orderedlist>
</para>

</chapter>
